## The mathematics of all-cause mortality

Note: While editing this article, I came across <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hazard_ratio#The_hazard_ratio_and_survival">survival functions and hazard ratios</a>, which covers the ideas here. I'll still leave this post here so there is some searchable article with the phrase "all-cause-mortality" that also describes the underlying math behind it.

Earlier this year, I decided to get back into working out with more of a "longetivity" perspective. That's how I landed on <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jN0pRAqiUJU">this video</a>. Here's an excerpt:

Attia: "So smoking, how much does smoking increase your risk of all-cause mortality? And the reason we like to talk about what's called ACM or all-cause mortality is it's really agnostic to how you die. And that doesn't always make sense. I mean, if you're talking about a very specific intervention like a anti-cancer therapeutic, you really care about cancer-specific mortality or heart-specific mortality. But when we talk about these sort of broad things, we like to talk about ACM. So using smoking, smoking is approximately a 40% increase in the risk of ACM."

Huberman: "What does that translate to? And that means I'm shortening my life by 40%?

Attia: "No, it means at any point in time, there's a 40% greater risk that you're gonna die relative to a non-smoker and a never-smoker."

Huberman: "Got it."

Attia: "So it's important to distinguish. It doesn't mean your lifespan is gonna be 40% less. It means at any point in time standing there, your risk of death is 40% higher. And by the way, that'll catch up with you, right? At some point, that catches up. High blood pressure, it's about a 20 to 25% increase in all-cause mortality. You take something really extreme like end-stage kidney disease. So these are patients that are on dialysis waiting for an organ. And again, there's a confounder there because what's the underlying condition that leads you to that? It's profound hypertension, significant type 2 diabetes that's been uncontrolled. That's enormous. That's about 175% increase in ACM. So the hazard ratio is like 2.75. Type 2 diabetes is probably about a 1.25 as well. So a 25% increase."

I have no idea which of these statements are based on solid evidence and which aren't, but that's a pretty interesting mathematical definition. And so let's analyze it - how does an increase or decrease in ACM (all-cause mortality) impact our lifespan in the long term?

---
# Formalizing the problem

Let's say we have two identical twin brothers named Smokey and Nosmokey. They both live identical lives until they turn 18, at which point Smokey takes a vow to smoke a pack of cigarettes a day and Nosmokey takes a vow to never smoke a cigarette. And the rest of their lifestyles are similar, except for differences that are directly the result of smoking.

So assuming the claim from the video is 100% accurate, each second that Smokey and Nosmokey are alive after 18, Smokey has a 40% higher chance of death. For $t>0$, let $F(t)$ be the probability the NoSmokey is alive at $18+t$ years old (we're allowing $t$ to be fractional here). Likewise let $G(t)$ be the probability that Smokey is alive at $18+t$ years old. We want to understand the relationship between $F(t)$ and $G(t)$.

Let's pick a time $t_0>0$ and $h>0$. The probability that Nosmokey dies between $t_0$ and $t_0+h$ is $F(t_0)-F(t_0+h)$. But if Nosmokey is alive at time $t_0$ and asks what his probability is of making it to time $t_0+h$, the probability becomes:

$(F(t_0)-F(t_0+h))/F(t_0)$;

that is, the _conditional probability_ of Nosmokey being alive at time $t_0+h$ given that Nosmokey is alive at time $t_0$ (see <a href="https://www.cuemath.com/conditional-probability-formula/">here</a> if you are unfamiliar with conditional probability).

Analagously the conditional probability of Smokey being alive at time $t_0+h$ given that he is alive at time $t_0$ is:

$(G(t_0)-G(t_0+h))/G(t_0)$.

We are now in a setting where we can apply our definition of all-cause mortality. Remember a 40% higher ACM means that "at any point in time standing there, your risk of death is 40% higher." So we have:

$\frac{(G(t_0)-G(t_0+h))/G(t_0)}{(F(t_0)-F(t_0+h))/F(t_0)}\approx 1.4$

where the approximation is better the smaller $h$ is. Formally:

$\lim\limits_{h\rightarrow 0}\frac{(G(t_0)-G(t_0+h))/G(t_0)}{(F(t_0)-F(t_0+h))/F(t_0)}= 1.4$

Now that we have turned the english definition of ACM into a mathematical equation, let's see how we can relate $F$ and $G$.

---
# Relating the lifespans


Let's divide the top and bottom by $-h$:

$\lim\limits_{h\rightarrow 0}\frac{F(t_0)(G(t_0+h)-G(t_0)/h)}{G(t_0)(F(t_0+h)-F(t_0)/h)}= 1.4$

As $h\rightarrow 0$, $\frac{G(t_0+h)-G(t_0)}{h}\rightarrow G'(t_0)$ and $\frac{F(t_0+h)-F(t_0)}{h}\rightarrow F'(t_0)$. So taking $h\rightarrow 0$, we have:

$\frac{F(t_0)G'(t_0)}{G(t_0)F'(t_0)}=1.4$

Writing $t$ for $t_0$ and rearranging, we have:

$\frac{G'(t)}{G(t)}=\frac{1.4F'(t)}{F(t)}$

We're definitely _closer_ to relating $F(t)$ and $G(t)$ but this is still a bit of a mess. When I came across this step, I happened to be a teaching assisstant for a course that was all about simplifying these exact kinds of equations (which made this a fun exercise to give students). If you are familiar with the chain rule from single-variable calculus and the derivative of a logarithm, you'll notice that:

$(\ln(F(t))'=\frac{F'(t)}{F(t)}$

so we can rewrite our equation as:

$(\ln(G(t))'=1.4(\ln(F(t))'$.

Taking anti-derivatives of both sides gives:

$\ln(G(t))=1.4\ln(F(t))+C$

where $C$ is some constant. Because $F(0)=G(0)=1$, we see that $C=0$ and so $\ln(G(t))=1.4\ln(F(t))$. Raising $e$ to the power of both sides:

$G(t)=F(t)^{1.4}$,

a remarkably simple relationship! So if Nosmokey has a 90% chance of making it to 30, then Smokey has a $(.9)^{1.4}\approx$ 82% chance of making it to 30. Whatever age Nosmokey has a 50% chance of making it to, Smokey has a $(.5)^{1.4}\approx$ 38% chance of making it to the same age. Whatever age Nosmokey has a 10% chance of making it to, Smokey has roughly 4% chance of making it to. 

---
# Takeaways

Chances are, all-cause mortality does not work nearly as neatly as the video might suggest. But a bad model is better than no model. Speaking of bad models, you can use various online tools to get rough estimates of how likely you are to make it to various ages and see how different increases and decreases in ACM impact those percentages by simply raising them to the appropriate power.

